Monsters in pathfinder as a base are graded in difficulty by their challenge rating(CR).


The CR is mainly calculated based on:
    how difficult the creature is to kill.
    how easily the creature can kill.


The durability of a creature, or its defense, is measured mainly by:
    their Armor Class(AC).
    their hit points(HP).

and secondarily by:
    their saving throw bonuses(saves).
    Damage reduction(DR).
    Energy resistance(resistance).
    healing.


The lethality of a creature, or its offense, is measured mainly by:
    their average damage per round if all attacks are successful.
        based off of average value per round over 3 rounds.
        for area of effect(AoE) abilities, the damage is calculated as if hitting 2 creatures.

    their average attack bonus(attack) for attacking creatures.

    the dice check(DC) of their offensive abilities for ability using creatures relying on DCs.


In addition to the above.
A creature can have special abilities that improve their defense and/or offense.

An example would be permanent or at-will invisibility.
At low CRs, before player characters(PCs) reliably have access to invisibility detection,
would improve both offense and defense in significant and hard to calculate ways.

another example would be a flying creature with ranged attacks.
This would inadvertly make it impervious to melee attacks.
A creature basically impervious to melee attacks would have a very high defensive value.
This without it actually changing any actual defensive statistics.

For each CR a creature is expected to have roughly a certain value of HP, AC, Damage, Attack, Saves and DCs.
Lower values for lower CR and higher values for higher CR.


For a creature that has all the average values for a CR 10 monster, the monster should logically be CR 10.
If then the creature's HP value is adjusted to be just a little lower, it is still technically a CR 10.
Though a CR 10 with a lower than average Defensive score as well as a lower than average HP score.
If the creature's AC value is then increased a little bit to compensate, the theory is that it will again have an average Defensive score, even though the HP score is lower than average and the AC score is higher than average.
So if a creature with all statistics being those of a CR 10 creature except for the HP which is that of a CR 9 and the AC which is that of a CR 11 is still a CR 10 creature.


The limits of this presented in https://aonprd.com/Rules.aspx?ID=2452
CR values:
    don't go below CR 1/2.

Outsiders and Constructs:
    typically have lower HP totals.

Creatures that rely on melee or ranged weapons in combat:
    typically deal damage within the range of high and low damage presented on the table.
        Damage values closer to the low value imply a higher attack value.
        Damage values closer to the high value imply a lower attack value.

Primary ability DC:
    is the average DC for any ability the creature relies on in combat.

Secondary ability DC:
    is the average DC for a creature that does not rely on those for combat.
    generally should be the minimum value for a creature.

Saves:
    Good Save is average saving throw for a creature's good saving throws as determined by class and type.
    Poor Save is average saving throw for a creature's poor saving throws as determined by class and type.

Sizes:
    Size	    Minimum CR	Maximum CR	Base Str	Base Dex	Base Con
    Fine	    —	        2	        1	        18	        8
    Diminutive	—	        3	        1	        16	        8
    Tiny	    —	        6	        2	        14	        8
    Small	    —	        —	        6	        12	        8
    Medium	    —	        —	        10	        10	        10
    Large	    2	        —	        18	        8	        14
    Huge	    4	        —	        26	        6	        18
    Gargantuan	6	        —	        34	        6	        22
    Colossal	8	        —	        42	        6	        26

The above ability score values are the average scores that a creature of a given size should have.

The minimum and maximum CR are exactly as described the recommended values and should not be deviated from without good reason.

Base value for mental ability scores is 10 and should be adjusted according to creature concept, saves and DCs.
Creatures usually rely on charisma for abilities.
Creatures incapable of speech have an intelligence score of 2 or lower.
Unintelligent undead, constructs, oozes, plants and vermin rarely have an intelligence score.

A creature with an AC that deviates from the average by more than 5 points might not be in the right CR.

A creature with an attack that is significantly different from the average value for its CR might need to have its CR adjusted.
    
Resistances are common in creatures of CR 5 and lower.
Damage reduction, energy immunities and regeneration are more common in creatures above CR 5.
Spell resistance and immunities become common above CR 10.
    Spell resistance should be 11+CR generally

Creatures have treasure according to table. Treasure can be used as combat gear and should then be included in the statistics of the creature.    

Solutions:
    CR values below CR 1/2 can be reverse engineered.
    Constructs will most likely naturally have lower hp due to not getting hp from ability scores.
    Outsiders will have a note that they should be based on average lower hp value than normal.
    Damage value is calculated based on average value between high and low, rounded down as per pathfinder rules.
    Damage for creatures that rely on abilities should by my personal standards also fall within this range.
    If AC deviates by 6 or more from expected CR, then adjust suggested CR accordingly and inform the user of this change. Doesn't change actual CR.
    If CR is higher or lower than size allows then inform user of this, but don't stop the user.
